---
layout: post
title: Applying alternative trusted root certificate sets to Windows
comments: false
---

As of today, Windows trusts 322 root certificates issued by 122 different organizations from 47 countries. This number is quite high, and has been steadily growing over the last few years. Each of these CAs is given tremendous power over your Internet traffic, so it makes great sense to minimize the number of CAs your computer trusts. One simple way to achieve this goal is to replace the default Windows list of root CAs with the much stricter Mozilla trust list, which includes 142 roots (52 organizations - 21 countries). An even stricter option is using the Google CTL, which currently includes just 127 root certificates (48 organizations - 21 countries). For the vast majority of users, applying either set is a great way to reduce your exposure to unnecessary CAs, with no negative impact whatsoever.

Here is a simple 5-step guide to make your system trust the Mozilla list of root certificates using the free version of RootIQ (*):

    1. Use the Quick select dropdown to select the Mozilla trust set
    2. Right-click the selection and click Invert selection
    3. Right-click the selection and click Distrust
       Click Yes on the confirmation dialog
       This will distrust all roots that are not part of the Mozilla trust set, except for any Microsoft OS-critical roots.
    4. Use the Quick select dropdown to select the Mozilla trust set (again)
    5. Right-click the selection and Trust

On a standard Windows 10 system as of this writing, you will end up with 145 trusted roots after the above steps (rather than 322 roots if you just follow the Microsoft CTL) 

(*) RootIQ, our own root certificate manager for Windows, is now available and offers a free version for home and evaluation use. Applying alternate trust lists is just one of the cool features of RootIQ.
